Overview:




We all experience anxiety. For example, speaking in front of a group can make us anxious, but that anxiety also motivates us to prepare and practice. Driving in heavy traffic is another common source of anxiety, but it helps keep us alert and cautious to avoid accidents. However, when feelings of intense fear and distress become overwhelming and prevent us from doing everyday activities, an anxiety disorder may be the cause.




Anxiety disorders are the most common mental health concern in the United States. Over 40 million adults in the U.S. (

19.1%

) have an anxiety disorder. Meanwhile, approximately 

7%

 of children aged 3-17 experience issues with anxiety each year. Most people develop symptoms before age 21.




Symptoms




Anxiety disorders are a group of related conditions, each having unique symptoms. However, all anxiety disorders have one thing in common: persistent, excessive fear or worry in situations that are not threatening. People typically experience one or more of the following symptoms:




Emotional symptoms:







Feelings of apprehension or dread




Feeling tense or jumpy




Restlessness or irritability




Anticipating the worst and being watchful for signs of danger







Physical symptoms:







Pounding or racing heart and shortness of breath




Sweating, tremors and twitches




Headaches, fatigue and insomnia




Upset stomach, frequent urination or diarrhea







Types of Anxiety Disorders




There are many types of anxiety disorders, each with different symptoms. The most common types of anxiety disorders include:




Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD)




GAD produces chronic, exaggerated worrying about everyday life. This worrying can consume hours each day, making it hard to concentrate or finish daily tasks. A person with GAD may become exhausted by worry and experience headaches, tension or nausea.




Social Anxiety Disorder




More than shyness, this disorder causes intense fear about social interaction, often driven by irrational worries about humiliation (e.g. saying something stupid or not knowing what to say). Someone with social anxiety disorder may not take part in conversations, contribute to class discussions or offer their ideas, and may become isolated. Panic attacks are a common reaction to anticipated or forced social interaction.




Panic Disorder




This disorder is characterized by panic attacks and sudden feelings of terror sometimes striking repeatedly and without warning. Often mistaken for a heart attack, a panic attack causes powerful physical symptoms including chest pain, heart palpitations, dizziness, shortness of breath and stomach upset. Many people will go to desperate measures to avoid an attack, including social isolation.




Phobias




We all tend to avoid certain things or situations that make us uncomfortable or even fearful. But for someone with a phobia, certain places, events or objects create powerful reactions of strong, irrational fear. Most people with specific phobias have several things that can trigger those reactions; to avoid panic, they will work hard to avoid their triggers. Depending on the type and number of triggers, attempts to control fear can take over a person’s life.




Other anxiety disorders include:







Agoraphobia




Selective mutism




Separation anxiety disorder




Substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder, involving intoxication or withdrawal or medication treatment







Causes




Scientists believe that many factors combine to cause anxiety disorders:







Genetics.

  Studies support the evidence that anxiety disorders “run in families,” as some families have a higher-than-average amount of anxiety disorders among relatives.




Environment. 

A stressful or traumatic event such as abuse, death of a loved one, violence or prolonged illness is often linked to the development of an anxiety disorder.







Diagnosis




Physical symptoms of an anxiety disorder can be easily confused with other medical conditions, like heart disease or hyperthyroidism. Therefore, a doctor will likely perform an evaluation involving a physical examination, an interview and lab tests. After ruling out an underlying physical illness, a doctor may refer a person to a mental health professional for evaluation.




Using the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) a mental health professional is able to identify the specific type of anxiety disorder causing symptoms as well as any other possible disorders that may be involved. Tackling all disorders through comprehensive treatment is the best recovery strategy.




Treatment




Different anxiety disorders have their own distinct sets of symptoms. This means that each type of anxiety disorder also has its own treatment plan. But there are common types of treatment that are used. 







Psychotherapy

, including cognitive behavioral therapy




Medications

, including antianxiety medications and antidepressants




Complementary health approaches

, including stress and relaxation techniques







Related Conditions




Anxiety disorders can occur along with other mental health conditions, and they can often make related conditions worse. So, talk with a mental health care professional if you are experiencing anxiety and any of the following:







Depression




Substance Use




Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (

ADHD

)




Eating Disorders




Trouble Sleeping







 




Reviewed December 2017






Treatment:




Once it is clear there is no underlying physical condition present or medication side effect causing your anxiety, then exploring options for mental health treatment is essential.




The types of treatment proven to be most effective for many people experiencing an anxiety disorder involve a combination of psychotherapy and medication. Your preferences in a treatment plan are essential, however, so discuss the best approaches and options with your treatment team.




Co-occurring conditions, like depression, are common when a person has anxiety. Be sure to work with your treatment team to make sure these other conditions are not overlooked.




Psychotherapy




Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT)

 is the most researched 

psychotherapy

 for anxiety disorders. In general, CBT focuses on finding the counterproductive thinking patterns that contribute to anxiety. CBT offers many constructive strategies to reduce the beliefs and behaviors that lead to anxiety.





CBT is also effective when delivered outside of the traditional in-person setting. Working with a therapist using 

telehealth technology

 — like video or phone calls or online learning modules that teach CBT concepts — 

can be just as effective

 as traditional face-to-face therapy.





CBT has the largest research base to support its effectiveness, though it can be difficult to figure out which therapists are trained in CBT. There is no single national certification program for this skill. Ask your therapist how they approach treating anxiety and their trainings in these approaches.







Exposure Response Prevention 

is a psychotherapy for specific anxiety disorders like phobias and social anxiety. Its aim is to help a person develop a more constructive response to a fear. The goal is for a person to “expose” themselves to that which they fear, in an attempt to experience less anxiety over time and develop effective coping tools.




Medication




Some people find that medication is helpful in managing an anxiety disorder. Talk with your health care provider about the potential benefits, risks and side effects.







Anti-anxiety medications

. Certain medications work solely to reduce the emotional and physical symptoms of anxiety. Benzodiazepines can be effective for short-term reduction of symptoms, but can create the risk of dependence when used for a long time. Be sure to review these potential risks if you select these medicines. 

Click here

 for more information on these medications.




Antidepressants

. Many antidepressants may also be useful for treating anxiety. These can also be useful if your anxiety has a co-occurring depression. Be sure to check our 

Medication page

 for more information.







Complementary Health Approaches




More and more people have started using 

complementary and alternative treatments

 along with conventional treatment to help with their recovery. Some of the most common approaches for treating anxiety include:







Self-management strategies

, such as allowing for specific periods of time for worrying. Someone who becomes an expert on their condition and its triggers gains more control over their day.




Stress and Relaxation Techniques

 often combine breathing exercises and focused attention to calm the mind and body. These techniques can be an important component in treating phobias or panic disorder.




Yoga

. The combination of physical postures, breathing exercises and meditation found in yoga have helped many people improve the management of their anxiety disorder.




Exercise

. Aerobic exercise can have a positive effect on your stress and anxiety. Check with your primary care doctor before beginning an exercise plan.







 




Reviewed December 2017






Support:




If you, a family member or friend is experiencing symptoms of an anxiety disorder, there is help. NAMI is here to provide you with support and information about community resources for you and your family.




Find education programs and support groups 

at your local NAMI

. Contact the NAMI HelpLine at 1-800-950-NAMI (6264) or 

info@nami.org

 if you have any questions about anxiety or want help finding support and resources.




Helping Yourself




Anxiety disorders can impact even the smallest details of life. It’s important to get help and learn how to remain resilient during difficult times. Here are some ways you can help yourself move forward:







Become an expert.

 Learn about medication and 

treatment options

. Keep up with current research. Build a personal library of useful websites and helpful books.




Know your triggers and stressors.

 If large groups make you nervous, go to a park and sit on an out-of-the-way bench. If taking a walk outdoors reduces your anxiety before a big meeting, schedule a 10-minute walk before the meeting starts. Being mindful of triggers and stressors will help you live your life with fewer limitations.




Partner with your health care providers.

 Actively participate in your treatment by working with mental health care professionals to develop a plan that works for you. Talk with them about your goals, decide on a recovery pace you’re comfortable with and stick to your plan. Don’t quit when something doesn’t go well. Instead, talk to your doctor or therapist about possible changes.




Get healthy.

 Studies have reported that 30 minutes of vigorous, aerobic exercise can eliminate symptoms, while low-key activities like meditation, yoga or Tai Chi relieve stress. Regular exercise can reduce many symptoms. Diet is also an important factor, so try to eat healthy, balanced meals and pay attention to food sensitivities. In some people, certain foods or additives can cause unpleasant physical reactions, which may lead to irritability or anxiety.




Avoid drugs and alcohol.

 These substances may 

seem

 to help with anxiety at first, but can disrupt emotional balance, sleep cycles and interact with medications. Coffee, energy drinks and cigarettes worsen anxiety.




Find support.

 Share your thoughts, fears and questions with others. NAMI offers 

support groups and education programs

, as well as online discussion communities.







Learn more about 

managing your mental health and finding support

 while living with mental illness.




Helping a Family Member or Friend




Learn about your loved one’s triggers, stressors and symptoms. By being informed and aware, you may help prevent an increase in symptoms. Look for things like rapid breathing, fidgeting or avoidance behaviors. Discuss your friend or family member’s past experiences with them so they can recognize the signs early as well.







Play a role in treatment.

 Increasingly, mental health professionals are recommending couple or family-based treatment programs. And on occasion, a therapist might enlist a loved one to help reinforce behavior modification techniques with homework. Ultimately, the work involved in recovery is the responsibility of the person with the disorder, but you can play an active, supportive role.




Communicate.

 Speak honestly and kindly. Make specific offers of help and follow through. Tell the person you care about her. Ask how she feels and don’t judge her for her anxious thoughts.




Allow time for recovery.

 Understanding and patience 

need to be balanced

 with pushing for progress and your expectations.




React calmly and rationally.

 Even if your loved one is in a crisis, it’s important to remain calm. Listen to him and make him feel understood, then take the next step in getting help.







Find out more about 

taking care of your family member or friend

 (without forgetting about yourself!).




 




Reviewed December 2017




