Overview:




Traumatic events—such as an accident, assault, military combat or natural disaster—can have lasting effects on a person’s mental health. While many people will have short term responses to life-threatening events, some will develop longer term symptoms that can lead to a diagnosis of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD). PTSD symptoms often co-exist with other conditions such as substance use disorders, depression and anxiety. A comprehensive medical evaluation resulting in an individualized treatment plan is optimal.




PTSD affects 

3.6%

 of the U.S. adult population—about 9 million individuals. About 

37%

 of those diagnosed with PTSD are classified as having severe symptoms. Women are 

significantly

 more likely to experience PTSD than men.




Symptoms




A diagnosis of PTSD requires a discussion with a trained professional. Symptoms of PTSD generally fall into these broad categories:







Re-experiencing type symptoms

,

 such as recurring, involuntary and intrusive distressing memories, which can include flashbacks of the trauma, bad dreams and intrusive thoughts.




Avoidance

, which can include staying away from certain places or objects that are reminders of the traumatic event. A person might actively avoid a place or person that might activate overwhelming symptoms.




Cognitive and mood symptoms

, which can include trouble recalling the event, negative thoughts about one’s self. A person may also feel numb, guilty, worried or depressed and have difficulty remembering the traumatic event. Cognitive symptoms can in some instances extend to include out-of-body experiences or feeling that the world is "not real" (derealization).




Arousal symptoms

,

 such as hypervigilance. Examples might include being intensely startled by stimuli that resembles the trauma, trouble sleeping or outbursts of anger.







Young children can also develop PTSD, and the symptoms are different from those of adults. (This recent recognition by the field is a major step forward and research is ongoing.) Young children lack the ability to convey some aspects of their experience. Behavior (e.g. clinging to parents) is often a better clue than words, and developmental achievements in an impacted child might slip back (e.g. reversion to not being toilet trained in a 4-year-old).




It is essential that a child be assessed by a professional who is skilled in the developmental responses to stressful events. A pediatrician or child mental health clinician can be a good start.




Causes




PTSD can occur at any age and is directly associated with exposure to trauma. Adults and children who have PTSD represent a relatively small portion of those who have been exposed to trauma. This difference is not yet well understood but we do know that there are risk factors that can increase a person’s likelihood to develop PTSD. Risk factors can include  prior experiences of trauma, and factors that may promote resilience, such as social support. This is also an ongoing area of research.




We do know that for some, our “fight-or-flight” biological instincts, which can be life-saving during a crisis, can leave us with ongoing symptoms. Because the body is busy increasing its heart rate, pumping blood to muscles, preparing the body to fight or flee, all our physical resources and energy are focused on getting out of harm’s way. Therefore, there has been discussion that the posttraumatic stress response may not a disorder per se, but rather a variant of a human response to trauma.




Whether you think of these symptoms as a stress response variant or PTSD, consider them a consequence of our body’s inability to effectively return to “normal” in the months after its extraordinary response to a traumatic event.




Diagnosis




Symptoms of PTSD usually begin within three months after experiencing or being exposed to a traumatic event. Occasionally, symptoms may emerge years afterward. For a diagnosis of PTSD, symptoms must last more than one month. Symptoms of depression, anxiety or substance use often accompany PTSD.




Treatment




Though PTSD cannot be cured, it can be treated and managed in several ways.







Psychotherapy

, such as cognitive processing therapy or group therapy




Medications




Self-management strategies

, such as self-soothing and mindfulness, are helpful to ground a person and bring her back to reality after a flashback




Service animals, especially dogs, can help soothe some of the symptoms of PTSD







Related Conditions




Someone with PTSD may have additional disorders, as well as thoughts of or attempts at suicide:







Anxiety Disorders




Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder

 (OCD)




Borderline Personality Disorder




Depression




Substance use disorders / 

Dual Diagnosis







These other illnesses can make it challenging to treat PTSD. For example, medications used to treat OCD or depression may worsen symptoms of PTSD. Successfully treating PTSD almost always improves these related illnesses and successful treatment of depression, anxiety or substance use usually improves PTSD symptoms.




 




Reviewed December 2017






Treatment:




When people experience, or are exposed to, trauma, their biological and psychological responses can be intense and painful. Many people will then move on with their lives with few or no symptoms, but for some, the intensity and pain remain. It can be difficult to make the decision to seek help since it's common to feel like we should just "get over" the experience.




There are several well-studied treatment approaches to address the symptoms of PTSD. The best treatment plan should include your preferences while also addressing any other co-existing conditions you may have.




Medications alone are unlikely to heal the psychological wounds of trauma and may also create side effects. Most people find a combination of two approaches—psychotherapy and medication—yields the best results.




Receiving support

 and compassion immediately after a traumatic event is also critical. Some people will want to talk about the event, while others will find it troubling and overwhelming. It’s not helpful to force anyone to discuss a traumatic event until they are ready.




Psychotherapy




There are many different types of 

psychotherapy

. Some psychotherapy approaches involve returning your attention to the traumatic event and can be provocative and challenging. However, when they are done well as part of a coordinated treatment approach they often result in fewer symptoms.




Research indicates that there are several therapeutic approaches that are more effective than others in addressing the symptoms of PTSD:







Cognitive Processing Therapy 

is a type of cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) that works to address the negative thinking and self-blame symptoms that may come with having PTSD . There is specific training for the psychotherapist and materials to guide this treatment.




Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing (EMDR)

 was specifically designed to treat trauma. This therapy uses measured exposure to traumatic memories with alternating stimuli (eye movements are one of several options) in structured sessions with a health care professional certified to perform EMDR.




Exposure Therapy

 is a type of psychotherapy that enables a skilled practitioner to help people safely face what they find traumatizing so they can learn to cope effectively. One technique used in exposure therapy involves virtual reality programs that allow a person to experience the situation in which they experienced trauma to help process it.




Group Therapy 

with others who have similar experiences can help build resilience when someone feels alone and isolated. Group therapy helps lessen shame and provide support, as well as reduce feelings of helplessness. Groups for survivors of sexual assault and combat experiences frequently have members living with PTSD and related symptoms.







Ask your therapist if they are familiar with, or have been trained in, these specific techniques. If their answer is no, ask what approach they use in trauma psychotherapy. There are other effective approaches, but it is helpful to understand your health care professional’s experience in addressing PTSD. Consider asking your therapist, primary care doctor or health plan provider for a referral to a specialist in these treatments if you conclude they are the best match for you.




Medications




There is no one 

medication

 that treats all the symptoms of PTSD, yet some medications can help with some symptoms and also increase the effectiveness of psychotherapy. When selecting a medication, you should also consider the presence of any other conditions such as depression or anxiety and how they may be impacted.







Antidepressants

 can be useful to help reduce symptoms of PTSD. Some serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) have been approved by the FDA for the treatment of PTSD in adults and are often the first line of treatment. Be sure to be informed about medication uses and side effects, and ask your doctor about the latest research in this field.




Other medication approaches 

are also available, although some are not FDA-approved specifically for the treatment of PTSD symptoms. Ask your doctor for more information about all medication options available.




Other biological interventions

. Many states that have legalized marijuana for medical use, and it includes an indication for PTSD. To date, there has not been a randomized controlled trial on the effectiveness of marijuana for PTSD, so it’s difficult to assess its potential viability as a treatment. Research is also underway to assess the potential use of Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA) to augment psychotherapy for PTSD. MDMA is currently not legal in the U.S.







Complementary Health Approaches




Recently, many health care professionals have begun to include 

complementary and alternative methods

 into treatment regimens. Some methods that have been used for PTSD include:







Yoga




Aqua therapy




Acupuncture




Mindfulness and meditation strategies and practices







Service dogs are another option for non-traditional therapy for people experiencing PTSD. A service dog is by a person’s side 24 hours a day to help navigate daily stressors. Most animals come to the person pre-trained with a set of commands. The owner can rely upon the dog for help and as a reality grounding tool, which can help prevent a re-experience or other symptoms. These animals can also serve as a social buffer, an incentive to exercise and a de-escalation tool during times of stress.




 




Reviewed December 2017






Support:




If you, a family member or friend is experiencing symptoms of PTSD, there is help. NAMI is here to provide you with support and information about community resources for you and your family.




Find education programs and support groups 

at your local NAMI

. Contact the NAMI HelpLine at 1-800-950-NAMI (6264) or 

info@nami.org

 if you have any questions about PTSD or want help finding support and resources.




Helping Yourself




Self-care while experiencing PTSD is a must, as it provides a sense of grounding and relief from symptoms. Here are some tips:







Practice mindfulness

. Techniques that use the senses to guide yourself back to the present are useful when you’re experiencing a flashback, feeling “outside of your body,” or recalling memories that are so painful they cause physical distress. Mindfulness can include things like focusing on breathing slowly and deeply, touching a piece of fabric or sniffing something with a strong or soothing scent.




Connect with others.

 Find emotional support from others living with PTSD. It’s helpful to share your thoughts, fears and questions with other people who have the same condition or similar experiences. Use online message boards or in-person groups.




Avoid recreational drugs and alcohol.

 These substances can disturb emotional balance and interact with prescribed medications.







Learn more about 

managing your mental health and finding support

 while living with mental illness.




Helping a Family Member or Friend




As with any mental illness, encouragement and support of friends and family is very important. This is especially true for people who have experienced trauma. NAMI offers several resources, including the 

NAMI Peer-to-Peer

 educational program and 

NAMI Connection

 recovery support group, which are both led by and for people with mental health conditions.




To learn more about PTSD:







Take the PTSD e-learning module 

now available

.




Read this 

PTSD Help Guide

, which offers a number of excellent tips for helping your loved one and yourself cope with the symptoms of PTSD.




Look into 

NAMI Homefront

, a program for family members of veterans and service members whose traumatic experiences are associated to military services. 

Learn more about veteran mental health

.




Research 

mindfulness-based stress reduction

 (MBSR), a program that incorporates mindfulness to assist people with a range of conditions and life issues that were initially difficult to treat in a hospital setting.


	 







Reviewed December 2017




