


If you or someone you know is struggling or in crisis, help is available. 

Call

 or 

text

 988 or chat 

988lifeline.org

 to reach the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline.




Thoughts of suicide can be frightening. But by reaching out for help or checking in with family and friends, we can avoid devastating outcomes.







According to the CDC and NIMH

, nearly 46,000 lives were lost to suicide in 2020 alone. Comments or thoughts about suicide, also known as suicidal ideation, can begin small — for example, “I wish I wasn’t here” or “Nothing matters.” But over time, they can become more explicit and dangerous.




Warning Signs




Here are a few other warning signs of suicide:







Increased alcohol and drug use




Aggressive behavior




Withdrawal from friends, family and community 




Dramatic mood swings




Impulsive or reckless behavior







Suicidal behaviors are a psychiatric emergency. If you or a loved one starts to take any of these steps, seek immediate help from a health care provider or call 988 to reach the Suicide & Crisis Lifeline:







Collecting and saving pills or buying a weapon




Giving away possessions




Tying up loose ends, like organizing personal papers or paying off debts




Saying goodbye to friends and family







If you are unsure, a 

licensed mental health professional 

can help assess.




Risk Factors




Research has found that 

46%

 of people who die by suicide had a known mental health condition. Several other factors may put a person at risk of suicide, including but not limited to:







A family history of suicide




Substance use: Drugs can create mental highs and lows that worsen suicidal thoughts.




Intoxication: Analysis from the CDC indicates around 

1 in 5

 people who die by suicide had alcohol in their system at the time of death.




Access to firearms




A serious or chronic medical illness




Gender: Although 

more women

 

than men attempt suicide, men are 

4x

 more likely to die by suicide.




A history of trauma or abuse




Prolonged stress




A recent tragedy or loss







Support In A Crisis




When a suicide-related crisis occurs, friends and family are often caught off-guard, unprepared and unsure of what to do. The behaviors of a person experiencing a crisis can be unpredictable, changing dramatically without warning.





There are a few ways to approach a suicide-related crisis:







Talk openly and honestly. Don’t be afraid to ask questions like: “Do you have a plan for how you would kill yourself?”




Remove means such as guns, knives or stockpiled pills




Calmly ask simple and direct questions, like “Can I help you call your psychiatrist?”




If there are multiple people around, have one person speak at a time




Express support and concern




Don’t argue, threaten or raise your voice




Don’t debate whether suicide is right or wrong




If you’re nervous, try not to fidget or pace




Be patient







Like any other health emergency, it’s important to address a mental health crisis like suicide quickly and effectively. Unlike other health emergencies, mental health crises don’t have instructions or resources on how to help or what to expect (like the Heimlich Maneuver or CPR). That’s why NAMI created 

Navigating a Mental Health Crisis: A NAMI Resource Guide for Those Experiencing a Mental Health Emergency

, so people experiencing mental health emergencies and their loved ones can have the answers and information they need when they need it.





If your friend or family member struggles with suicidal ideation day-to-day, let them know that they can talk with you about what they’re going through. Make sure that you adopt an open and compassionate mindset when they’re talking. Instead of “arguing” or trying to disprove any negative statements they make (“Your life isn’t that bad!”), try active listening techniques such as reflecting their feelings and summarizing their thoughts. This can help your loved one feel heard and validated.





Let them know that mental health professionals are trained to help people understand their feelings and improve mental wellness and resiliency. 

Psychotherapy

, like cognitive behavioral therapy and dialectical behavior therapy, can help a person with thoughts of suicide recognize ineffective patterns of thinking and behavior, validate their feelings and learn positive coping skills. Suicidal thoughts are a symptom, just like any other — they can be treated, and they can improve over time.





Suicide is not the answer. There is hope.




08.2022


