


Jump To:

 

Quitting

 | 

Infographics & Resources


 



Living with a mental illness can be difficult, and some people may turn to smoking as a way to cope with symptoms or handle stressful life events. About 

18 million

 people with mental illness currently use tobacco products, and adults with mental illness use cigarettes at 

higher rates

 than those without a mental illness.




People with mental illness or a substance use disorder also smoke more cigarettes. Despite only representing 25% of the U.S. adult population, they consume 

40%

 of cigarettes sold in the U.S. — smoking 

two more packs per month

 than people without a mental health condition. People with serious mental illness represent only 6.9% of people who have smoked in the past month, but they consume 

8.7%

 of all cigarettes sold.




Although it may provide temporary relief from some symptoms, smoking is not a healthy solution for managing mental illness. Nicotine can 

alter mood

 in a way that covers up symptoms, which reinforces the increased use of tobacco in people with a mental health condition. Smoking tobacco can exacerbate existing mental and physical health challenges in the short term and lead to additional negative outcomes down the road. If you or a loved one smokes, here is what you need to know about smoking and mental illness — including information to help you quit.




Mental and Physical Health Effects




Smoking takes a toll on both your mental and physical health, and the consequences can be severe. In the U.S., people with mental illness who smoke die up to 

15 years earlier

 than people without mental illness who do not smoke. People with mental illness are 

four times

 more likely to die prematurely if they smoke cigarettes. Heart disease, cancer and lung disease are the 

leading causes of death

 for people with mental illness, so it’s important to understand how smoking affects your risk for these diseases.




Serious health effects of smoking tobacco include:







Increased risk of heart attack, stroke and lung cancer




Coughing and shortness of breath




Worsened 

anxiety, stress and depression




Oral health issues, including gum disease and 

tooth loss




Potential 

interactions with psychiatric medications







Smoking tobacco may decrease the effectiveness of some psychiatric medications, and you might need a higher dosage to achieve the same level of therapeutic benefit










Social isolation, 

stigma

 and negative self-image







Some of these harmful effects decrease immediately when you stop smoking, and 

the improvements add up over time

. Coughing and shortness of breath are reduced in the first month after quitting, risk of heart attack decreases after one year, risk of stroke decreases after five years, and increased risk of lung cancer is dramatically reduced after 10 years.




A number of other benefits are possible when you quit, including more financial freedom, a longer lifespan and a healthier home life.




Vaping and E-Cigarettes




Although some people may believe that vaping is a safe way to use tobacco, this is a dangerous misconception. 

E-cigarettes are not harmless

, and complete cessation from all tobacco products is the healthiest choice. Like combustible, or lighted, tobacco products, the liquid in e-cigarettes contains nicotine and can 

lead to dependence

.




E-liquids contain additional flavorings and chemical compounds like propylene glycol and glycerol, and research has 

not demonstrated

 that these compounds are safe to inhale. Because there is little regulatory oversight, e-cigarette products purchased “off the street” may be unsafe due to 

adulteration

 of these compounds. The overall long-term health effects of e-cigarettes are 

also unknown

.




Switching completely to e-cigarettes from combustible tobacco products 

may have some health benefit

, but e-cigarettes are 

not FDA-approved

 tobacco cessation devices.




Youth and Tobacco Use




The use of e-cigarettes is especially common among young people, even those who had never used combustible tobacco products before. In 2018, among young adults ages 18–24, 22.1% of people who currently smoked, 36.5% of people who used to smoke and 4.6% of people who had never smoked 

reported using e-cigarettes

.




And in 2020, 

3.6 million

 middle and high school students reported using e-cigarettes.




However, youth tobacco use is not limited to vaping — 1.15 million middle and high school students 

reported smoking cigarettes

 in 2019. Research also suggests that, like adults, youth may turn to smoking to cope with the symptoms or stressors associated with mental illness. People aged 12–17 are 

2.5 times more likely

 to report using cigarettes in the past month if they experienced a major depressive episode in the past year.




Fast Facts







As many as 

70-85% of people with schizophrenia

 and as many as 

50-70% of people with bipolar disorder

 smoke.




The negative health effects of secondhand smoke have killed about 

2.5 million people who do not smoke

 since 1964.




People with serious mental illness who smoke may spend 

up to one third of their income

 on cigarettes.




The 

average price

 for a pack of cigarettes in the U.S. is $6.28. A one pack per day smoker can save $44 per week, $188 per month and $2,292 per year by quitting smoking.





 



Quitting




Quitting smoking, or smoking cessation, is tough for anyone — and it can be even harder when you have a mental illness. Although tobacco use by adults has decreased in recent years, the rate of reduction is 

much lower

 among people with mental illness.




About 

70%

 of people with mental illness who smoke say they want to quit. Quitting is not only possible, but one of the best things you can do for your overall well-being.




Cessation treatments, nicotine replacement therapy and other strategies are 

safe, effective and do not increase symptoms

 for people with serious mental illness. Also keep in mind that 

treating an underlying mental illness

 while trying to quit results in the most success for smoking cessation.




How to Quit




There is 

no “right” way

 to quit and every attempt counts — it can take 

multiple

 attempts to quit completely.




Having a mental illness is a 

risk factor for relapse

 to smoking, even for those who have avoided using tobacco for more than a year, so it’s important to have a strategy and consider 

cessation assistance

.




Try starting with 

small steps

 such as:







Setting a quit date




Buying only one pack of cigarettes at a time so you run out on your quit date




Throwing away ash trays and lighters and cleaning your car’s interior




Identifying what triggers your urge to smoke




Finding healthy ways to 

distract yourself

, like chewing bubble gum or going for a walk




Telling someone you’re going to quit so they can help you stay accountable





 



When thinking about your overall strategy for quitting, there are three common options:







Cold Turkey

: completely quitting all tobacco and nicotine-containing products at the same time. While some people succeed using this method, most people will need additional support.




Nicotine Replacement Therapy (NRT)

: products like gum, patches, lozenges, and prescription nasal sprays or inhalers that deliver measured doses of nicotine to decrease the side effects of withdrawing from tobacco. These products are available “over the counter” to people aged 18 and older and come in a variety of strengths to help decrease nicotine consumption over time.
	




NRT can increase the chances of quitting successfully by 

about 50%

.




Although NRTs are designed for short-term use, they are safe for long-term use if necessary to prevent a return to smoking.




Using more than one NRT at the same time is safe, and can actually 

increase success in quitting

.










Prescription Medications: two medications, varenicline (Chantix®) and bupropion (Zyban® and Wellbutrin®), are approved by the FDA to aid in smoking cessation. They are both 

safe to use

 for people with mental illness.
	




Varenicline 

reduces the pleasurable effects

 of smoking and possible withdrawal symptoms. People who use varenicline are 

three times more likely

 to successfully quit compared to those who do not use a cessation medication.




Bupropion 

decreases nicotine cravings

 and withdrawal symptoms. People who use bupropion are 

two times more likely

 to successfully quit compared to those who do not use a cessation medication.













There are some risks associated with cessation products. For example, Bupropion can 

interact with MAOIs

, a class of psychiatric medications, and is not appropriate if you are already using Wellbutrin® for psychiatric purposes. It’s important to stay in touch with your health care provider and let them know about any 

worsening psychiatric symptoms

.




Regardless of which strategy you think is best for you, make sure to talk to your doctor about your desire to quit. Don’t wait for your provider to bring it up — research shows that only 

62% of psychiatrists

 ask about tobacco use and/or advise their patients to stop smoking. Your doctor will answer any questions you have and help you create a personalized quit plan. Visit 

Help to Quit

 for more information about talking to your doctor when you want to quit smoking.




No-Cost Resources







Quit Lines
	




1-800-QUIT-NOW




1-877-44U-QUIT










Websites
	




Betobaccofree.gov




Smokefree.gov










SmokefreeTXT Program
	




Text QUIT to 47848




Visit 

smokefree.gov

 for more information











